# Outlier-detection-CPET
This project seeks to compare outlier detecting methods in the variable of oxygen consumption (VO2) in the cardiopulmonary exercise test. With the selected method, outliers were detected and the maximum VO2 value was calculated to determine if it changed with detection, which would imply a different interpretation of the test for experts. Cardiopulmonary exercise testing (CPET) assesses the function of a patient's cardiorespiratory system and its functional capacity. Analyzing CPET results is challenging for medical staff because they are voluminous, contain a lot of information, and come in a raw format that makes direct analysis difficult. In addition, it presents a high variability that depends on the patient, the variables measured and the test execution process; all these factors generate data that depart from the usual pattern and that can alter the analysis of results. For this reason, it is necessary to preprocess the data obtained and detect outliers in order to facilitate the reading of the results and increase the reliability of the interpretation.
To develop the degree work, 407 CPET were used, obtained from the research project “Ejercicio físico en sujetos sanos no entrenados nativos a altitud moderada en comparación con crónicamente aclimatados “financed by Minciencias (Id: 120356934972) and the PUJ, collected between the year 2016 and 2018. The project seeks to make a comparison of six non-parametric outlier detection methods in the data set of the VO2 variable of the CPET to identify the most appropriate method, through performance metrics, and to evaluate the impact of the applied methodologies. Additionally, it was created a desktop app that allow detection to be applied with the selected method, calculate an impact variable before and after detection, and also generate a graphical representation of the VO2 variable against time before and after removing its atypical values.
The comparison between detection methods showed that the Isolation Forest was the one that obtained the best score in the Fb metric. By applying the method, a significant change in the value of the VO2 maximum was identified before and after the detection. These results were presented to three expert evaluators in CPET through the desktop app where they gave us feedback and presented proposals for improvement. The comments were positive, because the evaluators mentioned that the app facilitates the interpretation of the test and reduces the subjectivity of the outlier detection.
